Going back to prison is never easy, especially to a prison like Lamodello, the model prison in Barcelona.
This large penitentiary was built a century ago, with the intention of reforming criminals.
But sadly, it never lived up to its name.
Even suicides or murders were not uncommon in the galleries of this prison.
This fearsome place was a staging prison, where young brothers from the Barcelona area were taken.
Once they refused military service.
During the 1960s and 1970s, they were housed here for weeks, sometimes months, before being sent to military prisons.
In the fall of 2023, several former conscientious objectors decided to return.
These witnesses had been jailed in this prison some 50 years ago.
It was a bittersweet return for all of them, but they had a story to tell, and an exhibition at this former prison enabled them to do so.
Let us follow José Luis, a former inmate of this prison, as he accompanies a group of teenage witnesses who visit the exhibition.
It was a bitter return for José Luis in several ways.
He showed his young friends the same galleries where he was imprisoned.
They entered the same cells where he had been housed, and he pointed out the booths where he had spoken to his young wife.
This return to the prison triggered unpleasant flashbacks for José Luis.
He recalled the fear and the loneliness he felt when he found himself thrust into this frightening environment.
Let us listen in as he explains his experiences.
José Luis, how did you feel when you arrived in prison?
The worst moment I remember was arriving at Lamavela.
I still remember the sound of my cell door closing for the first time.
It was an extremely loud clang, and it was like that every day.
Every time the guard closed the door, it made me remember where I was, locked up and isolated.
There were other sounds that made me feel anxious.
Sometimes I would hear threats, or the screams of someone who was being beaten up, especially at night.
My life was reduced to a small space that I had to share with someone else.
Who could be dangerous if I didn't treat him right?
But it was also a sweet return for José Luis. He had reason to look back with pride.
But José Luis, after so many years, how do you feel now?
As the years go by, the wounds have healed, and I have been able to overcome the trauma of my time in prison.
When I returned to the prison, I felt a deep satisfaction.
I had passed the test, and my faith was strong.
On the other hand, I had played a small part in getting recognition for conscientious objection in Spain.
It was definitely worth it. I did what José expected of me, and he protected me.
I feel as James said, we consider happy those who've endured.
Jehovah is very tender in affection and merciful.
José Luis was also delighted to explain to his teenage friends,
who these days face different trials, how he could remain faithful.
And José Luis, how did you manage to keep your faith so strong in a place like this?
Well, at that time, we young brothers knew that this test would come.
So we tried to build ourselves up spiritually beforehand.
Before coming here, I packed a Bible, which was confiscated when I arrived.
But then, they gave it back to me at my request.
And I must say that this Bible was a blessing for me, and I still keep it as a treasured possession.
I also prayed to Jehovah, as I had never prayed before.
And especially at night, I poured out my heart to Jehovah,
and he helped me to clear my trouble thoughts and to completely rely on him.
We were also able to preach from time to time, when other prisoners asked us why we were here.
The so-called model prison never lived up to its name,
but it did provide a setting where faithful brothers displayed a model of true Christian integrity.
And the lessons that ones like José Luis himself learned can be passed on to the younger generation.
No doubt about it, young witnesses today can also discover that happy are those who have endured.